[Security] Getting Started with Nessus Scanner (#6155)
section-engineering-education/engineering-education: content/articles/getting-started-with-nessus-scanner/index.md

---
layout: engineering-education
status: publish
published: true
url: /getting-started-with-nessus-scanner/
title: Getting Started with Nessus Scanner
description: Nessus scanner is the most popular and widely used vulnerability scanner common among penetration testers and hackers. It is open-source and it allows free scan for up to 16 Private Addresses at a time. 
author: adeshina-peter
date: 2022-01-27T00:00:00-17:00
topics: [Security]
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
images:

  - url: /engineering-education/getting-started-with-nessus-scanner/hero.jpg
    alt: Getting Started with Nessus Scanner Hero Image
---

> **Nessus Tenable** is a kali-Linux open-source software common among penetration testers, used to provide a variety of security fixes. You are going to be using this tool quite frequently while you work as a pen-tester by scanning for potential vulnerability on a Server/Website.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Nessus Tenable** is a Kali-Linux open-source software common among penetration testers, used to provide a variety of security fixes. You will use this tool quite frequently while you work as a pen-tester by scanning for potential vulnerability on a server/website.
```

<!--more-->

> **Nessus** scanner is a professional tool that is widely used among hackers and penetration testers. The solution you get assists you to perform high-speed asset discovery, target profiling, malware detection, sensitive data discovery and so many more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Nessus** scanner is a professional tool widely used among hackers and penetration testers. The solution you get assists you to perform high-speed asset discovery, target profiling, malware detection, sensitive data discovery, and so many more.
```

**Tenable** delivers updated plug-ins that provide you with the latest information to customers within 24 hours after a vulnerability has been leaked.
**Nessus Tenable** grant you the privileges to scan basic networks and servers for free, and also provide you with how **critical**,**medium** or how **low** a vulnerability is and helps provide descriptions and solutions for a fix.

> Most sites that talk about Nessus only point out how Nessus is being installed and how it is been used, But how to fix a real vulnerability is hardly in the scope of what they teach. I will show you how to fix a common vulnerability and also guide you through important Nessus keywords.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most sites that talk about Nessus only point out how to install and use Nessus. But, how to fix a real vulnerability is hardly in the scope of what they teach. We will show you how to fix a common vulnerability and guide you through important Nessus keywords.
```

### Goal
At the end of this tutorial, you should be able to:

- Download and install Kali-Linux on your pc.

- Understand the fundamentals of Nessus Scanner.

- Understand the advantages of Nessus Scanner.

- Install and Download Nessus Tenable.

- Understand procedures to take in fixing vulnerabilities.

### Advantages of Nessus Scanner
- It helps you Identify vulnerabilities before attackers can take advantage of them.

- It helps you find misconfigurations like missing patches, mail-relay, etc.

- Capturing of data and showing results reporting impact on the network 

> If you don't have Kali-Linux installed on your pc, Don't worry I will show you how to quickly set this up.

Reviewer: Avoid using the word, "I" in your tutorials. The focus should always be on the reader. Please use 'we' instead and add commas where necessary. i.e, don't worry, .......

### Step 1:

### Installing Kali Linux

Use the link below to get to the download page:

- [Kali Linux iso](https://www.kali.org/get-kali/#kali-platforms)

#### Download Vmware (virtual box)

After successfully downloading the Kali Linux iso, you can now download the VMware virtual box using the link below:

- [Vmware virtual box](https://www.vmware.com/products/workstation-player/workstation-player-evaluation.html).

> Follow the [installing Vmware](https://forums.tomshardware.com/faq/how-to-install-vmware-workstation-in-windows-10.3273363/) tutorials to successfully install the VMware virtual box.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow the [installing Vmware](https://forums.tomshardware.com/faq/how-to-install-vmware-workstation-in-windows-10.3273363/) tutorials to install the VMware virtual box.
```

After Successfully installing Kali-Linux in a Virtual-Box, You can now Start Kali by

> Opening the virtual box, select the Kali Linux option, and click the play button to start your Kali Linux.

Reviewer: Avoid adding capital letters unnecessarily.

Enter your username and password when prompted.

**Note:** The **default** username is **root** and the default password is **toor**.

### Step 2:

### Download Nessus Tenable

- [Nessus Tenable](https://www.tenable.com/downloads/api/v1/public/pages/nessus/downloads/14957/download?i_agree_to_tenable_license_agreement=true).

After Successfully Downloading Nessus Tenable, Follow the steps below to install Nessus on Kali Linux:

- Start the **terminal** by:

 - Holding the **cltr+alt+T** buttons simultaneously or
   - Using the GUI (Graphical User Interface), go to the applications section and double click on the terminal option.

Now run the command below on the terminal to update and upgrade your Kali Linux.

```bash
    $ sudo apt-get upgrade && update -y
```

> Now let's change our directory into where Nessus tenable is been installed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, let's change our directory to where Nessus tenable is installed.
```

```bash
    $ cd Downloads
```

> Use the command below to list  all files in `Downloads` then copy the downloaded file name

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the command below to list all files in `Downloads`, then copy the downloaded file name.
```

```bash
    $ ls
``` 
Use the command below to grab the package to download it and install it.

```bash
    $ dpkg -i Nessus-10.0.2-ubuntu910_amd64.deb
```
![dpkg](dpkg-nessus.png)

> You can now start Nessus scanner by typing the following into your terminal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can now start the Nessus scanner by typing the following into your terminal.
```

```bash
    $ /bin/systemctl start nessusd.service
```
Then Navigate to the following URL in your browser to start Nessus Scanner.

- [Nessus localhost](https://kali:8843/) to configure your scanner

- Default port to run Nessus is **`8834`**

If you see connection not secured,  click *advance* Accept risk and continue.

### Step 3:

> - And here you have Nessus already on your screen, It going to compile plugins and it going to take a little bit of time so go ahead and let it finish. When it does go ahead and click `Nessus Essentials` and click continue.

Reviewer: Please check your grammar use.

> - Now provide Your name and a valid Email to receive an activation code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Now, provide your name and a valid email to receive an activation code.

```
